Lab 7 - Routing layer
=====================

Important

For this lab, SSH to your master node and escalate to your root user so
you can interact with OpenShift via the `oc` command line client.

The routing layer integrated with OpenShift uses HAProxy by default. It
maps the publicly available route you assign an application and maps it
back to the corresponding pods in your cluster. Each time an application
or route is updated (created, retired, scaled up or down), the
configuration in HAProxy is updated by OpenShift. HAProxy runs in a pod
in the default project on your infrastructure node.

Note

Other routing options

OpenShift uses a plugin framework for its routing layer. The default
router for OpenShift 3.11 is HAProxy, but OpenShift also ships with an
F5 router plugin. Additionally, there are cloud-provider specific and
third-party router plugins.

OpenShift 4 transitioned to [nginx](https://www.nginx.com/) as the
default router.

Inspecting HAProxy in OpenShift
-------------------------------

    # oc project default
    # oc get pods
    NAME                       READY     STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    docker-registry-1-77rmv    1/1       Running   0          2d
    registry-console-1-n7kbk   1/1       Running   0          2d
    router-1-mwb89             1/1       Running   0          2d <--- router pod running HAProxy

If you know the name of a pod, you can us `oc rsh` to connect to it
remotely. This is doing some fun magic using `ssh` and `nsenter` under
the covers to provide a connection to the proper node inside the proper
namespaces for the pod. Looking in the `haproxy.config` file for
references to `app-cli` gives displays your router configuration for
that application. `Ctrl-D` will exit out of your `rsh` session.

    # oc rsh router-1-mwb89
    sh-4.2$ grep app-cli haproxy.config
    backend be_http:image-uploader:app-cli
    server pod:app-cli-1-tthhf:app-cli:10.130.0.36:8080 10.130.0.36:8080 cookie 91b8f12aa1ca5b82e34e730715b58254 weight 256 check inter 5000ms
    server pod:app-cli-1-bgt75:app-cli:10.130.0.41:8080 10.130.0.41:8080 cookie 0f411f181edfdfb13c0c0d1b562f5efd weight 256 check inter 5000ms
    server pod:app-cli-1-26fgz:app-cli:10.131.0.6:8080 10.131.0.6:8080 cookie 67b4bd5bb54b037c5b37c8acadcfe833 weight 256 check inter 5000ms

If you use the `oc get pods` command for the Image Uploader project and
limit its output for the app-cli application, you can see the IP
addresses in HAProxy match the pods for the application.

    # oc get pods -l app=app-cli -n image-uploader -o wide
    NAME              READY     STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE       IP            NODE
    app-cli-1-26fgz   1/1       Running   0          3h        10.131.0.6    ip-172-16-50-98.ec2.internal
    app-cli-1-bgt75   1/1       Running   0          3h        10.130.0.41   ip-172-16-245-111.ec2.internal
    app-cli-1-tthhf   1/1       Running   0          3h        10.130.0.36   ip-172-16-245-111.ec2.internal

To confirm HAProxy is automatically updated, let's scale `app-cli` back
down to 1 pod and re-check the router configuration.

    # oc scale dc/app-cli -n image-uploader --replicas=1
    deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io "app-cli" scaled

    oc get pods -l app=app-cli -n image-uploader -o wide

    NAME READY STATUS RESTARTS AGE IP NODE app-cli-1-tthhf 1/1 Running 0 3h
    10.130.0.36 ip-172-16-245-111.ec2.internal

Instead of having to connect to a shell session inside the router pod,
you can use `oc exec` to run a single command in a pod and get the
output.

    oc exec router-1-mwb89 grep app-cli haproxy.config

    backend be\_http:image-uploader:app-cli server
    pod:app-cli-1-tthhf:app-cli:10.130.0.36:8080 10.130.0.36:8080 cookie
    91b8f12aa1ca5b82e34e730715b58254 weight 256 check inter 5000ms \`\`\`

    We were able to confirm that our HAProxy configuration updates
    automatically when applications are updated.

Summary
-------

We know this is a mountain of content. Our goal is to present you with
information that will be helpful as you sink your teeth into your own
OpenShift clusters in your own infrastructure. These are some of the
fundamental tools and tricks that are going to be helpful as you begin
this journey.
